docs/dryguide.md, before:

# Blythe Dry Lab Guide

[TOC]

Many thanks to the Andersen Lab, whose own "Dry Guide" is the basis for this adaptation. 

The computing cluster available to researchers at Northwestern is called Quest. Please see the link below to go to the table of contents for Northwestern IT's support docs for Quest.

__[Quest Docs](http://www.it.northwestern.edu/research/user-services/quest/index.html)__

## Introduction/Overview

New users will likely have some confusion about how all of this works. This guide is meant to help you with that. As a high-level overview: we can use a remote computing cluster called Quest to run processor-intensive jobs without tying down our local computation resources. Quest is a collection of "Nodes" of many multithreaded processors, as well as disk storage space. You can think of Quest as a remote computer that you can interact with solely through the command line. The computational resources on Quest are parceled out into 'allocations'. The most important allocation for our purposes is __b1042__. This is the "Genomics" buy-in allocation. Anyone at NU can sign up for access to __b1042__, and once they have access, they can begin submitting jobs to this system. When you log in to Quest, however, you aren't 'within' __b1042__, instead, when you log in, you are dropped off in your home directory (in terms of the file-system), and are using (in terms of computational resources) what is referred to as a __login node__. While __b1042__ has many cores and much memory available for computational processes, __login nodes__ have relatively less computational power. Therefore, if we have processor-instensive jobs to perform, we don't want to use a __login node__, instead we want to use __b1042__. To do this, we have to ask Quest to do our jobs on __b1042__ through one of two methods: as an 'interactive session' or as a 'batch submission'. Below, I describe how to initiate both of these approaches. 

Storage is another matter: each user's home directory has a limited amount of *private* storage that will be indefinitely maintained (and backed up). This is on the order of 80 Gigabytes, which isn't much. There are two other storage options: within the *Scratch Space* within __b1042__ as well as within the lab's own dedicated project, __p31603__. *Scratch Space* is essentially a wild-west first-come-first-served disk space for *all* users of __b1042__ to *temoprarily* store files that they are using in a project. It is vast (~200 Terabytes), not backed up, and files over 30-days in age are deleted regularly. The Blythe Lab has a directory within __b1042__ created within this *Scratch Space* that lab members can use to temporarily store files if necessary. In addition, the Blythe Lab has a dedicated "project" within Quest (__p31603__)that affords us 500 Gigabytes of storage space. This is the location where we should focus on staging our computational tasks. 

In the following, I describe how to get access to Quest, how to use some of its unique features, and how to submit jobs. 

## New Users

To gain access to Quest: 

Register new user with your NetID [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form?EQBCT=9b3647a8cb2145929737ab4a0540cb46).
		
Apply to be added to the lab's partition/project/allocation (p31603) [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/797775d810274db5889b5199c4260328).
Allocation manager: Shelby Blythe, `shelby.blythe@northwestern.edu`
		
Apply to be added to partition b1042 [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/797775d810274db5889b5199c4260328).
Allocation manager: Janna Nugent, `janna.nugent@northwestern.edu`

Use the Quest Help email: `quest-help@northwestern.edu` if necessary to get help

## Using Terminal or Something Fancier

Mac users can access Quest using Terminal. If you haven't used Terminal, search for it (`command + Space`, then enter "Terminal"). It is possible, however, to configure text editors to access Quest directly. This way, you can use the text editor to directly modify scripts without having to rely on Command Line text editors (like `nano`). I particularly like [Visual Studio Code (VSCode)](https://code.visualstudio.com/). VSCode runs on both Mac and Windows machines.

You can then configure VSCode to connect to the ssh host (Quest) by following [these instructions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh).

## Using the Command Line and `bash`

In general, you will be using the command line and `bash` when you use Quest. There are many available resources to learn the basics (Google it). To get started, Northwestern has collected some tutorials [here](https://sites.northwestern.edu/researchcomputing/2020/03/20/online-learning-resources-command-line/).

## Signing into Quest

Once you have been granted access to the cluster and have sorted out how you will connect, you can login using:

```
ssh <netid>@quest.northwestern.edu
```

If you are using Terminal, to avoid typing in the password everytime, one can [set up a ssh key](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-2).

You can set an alias in your `~/.bash_profile` to make logging in quicker:

```
alias quest="ssh <netid>@quest.it.northwestern.edu"
```

The above line makes it so you simply type `quest` and the login process is initiated. 

If you are not familiar with what a bash profile is, [take a look at this](https://www.quora.com/What-is-bash_profile-and-what-is-its-use).

!!! Important
    When you login it is important to be conscientious of the fact that you are on a login node. You should not be running any sort of heavy duty operation on these nodes. Instead, any analysis you perform should be submitted as a job or run using an interactive job (see below).

## Login Nodes

There are four login nodes we use: quser21-24. When you login you will be assigned to a random login node. You can switch login nodes by typing ssh and the node desired (_e.g._ `ssh quser21`).

You can easily determine your current login node by reading the command prompt, which takes the form: `<netID>@quser21`, if --for instance-- you are on the quser21 login node.

## Home Directory

Logging in places you in your home directory. You can install software in your home directory for use when you run jobs, or for small files/analysis.

Your home directory has a quota of 80 Gb. [More information on quotas, storage, etc](http://www.it.northwestern.edu/research/user-services/quest/file-systems.html).  You can check your storage space using the following command (from within your home directory):

```
du -hs *
```

This command `du` will estimate the **d**isk **u**sage of the current directory. `-hs` returns the **s**ummary of **h**uman-readable (i.e., not hidden) files.

From anywhere, you can determine the disk usage of your home directory using 

```
homedu
```

More information is provided below to help install and use software.

!!! Note
    In general, we will not be saving files long-term anywhere on Quest! Most of your work will take place within the project directory __p31603__. All files should be stored on the lab's network accessible storage device/server. 

## Projects

Quest is broadly organized into projects (or partitions, or allocations). Projects have associated with them storage, nodes, and users.

To determine what "groups" you have access to, enter `groups` on the command line. You should see at the very least `b1042` and `p31603` in the returned text. 

The Blythe lab has access to one project, __p31603__. This is where we have 500 GB of total storage. This is where we will store any compiled software necessary for running our analyses, as well as stage computational tasks. 

__b1042__ - The 'Genomics' Project has 200 Tb of space and 100 nodes associated with it. This space is shared with other labs and is designed for temporary use only. The space is available at `/projects/b1042/BlytheLab/`. By default, files are deleted after 30 days. One can submit jobs to `--partition=genomicsguestA` to use this partition, with a max job duration of 48hr. 

!!! Note
    Anyone who uses Quest should build your own folder under `/projects/p31603` with your name. You should only write and revise files under your project folder. You can read/copy data from elsewhere in __p31603__ but don't write/save any data to locations outside of your project folder. You could also store things on `/projects/b1042/BlytheLab`, but storage anywhere on __b1042__ is for 30 days only, so do not store anything here that you hope to maintain access to over a long period. We have limited space on __p31603__. This is also not a long-term location for storage, but rather a site where you import raw data, and save the output of processing, before you download the data back to long-term storage. 

## Running interactive jobs on Quest

If you are running a few simple commands or want to experiment with files directly you can start an interactive session on Quest. The command below will give you access to a node where you can run your commands. 

```
srun -A b1042 --partition=genomicsguestA -N 1 -n 24 --mem=64G --time=12:00:00 --pty bash -i 
```

!!! Important
    Do not run commands for big data on `quser21-24`. These are login nodes and are not meant for running heavy-load workflows. Using `srun` allows you to access (interactively) the correct nodes for your work. Another option (below) is to schedule a batch job. 
   
## Using packages already installed on Quest

Quest has a collection of packages installed. You can run `module avail` to see what packages are currently available on Quest. You can use `module load bowtie2` or `module load bowtie2/2.4.1` to load packages with the default or a specific version (`module add` does the same thing). If you do `echo $PATH` before and after loading modules, you can see what module does is simply appending paths to the packages into your `$PATH` so the packages can be found in your environment.

`module purge` will remove all loaded packages and can be helpful to try when troubleshooting.

## Submitting jobs to Quest

If you are all set up to use the lab's resources on Quest, you should be able to run the following test script to confirm that everything is operating as expected. The lab's project allocation contains a directory (.../TestData) that we use to check that everything is configured properly. 

Jobs on Quest are managed by [SLURM](https://slurm.schedmd.com/). Scripts for SLURM submissions differ slightly from regular bash scripts in that they have an extensive header that passes commands to SLURM that helps it determine how many resources to allocate to the job. Please see the `/projects/p31603/Quest_Setup_Test_Script_PE.sh` for an example of a script that is set up to run via the batch scheduler. A set of brief instructions on how to run the test script is included on a later page in this guide. 

## Monitoring SLURM Jobs on Quest

Here are some commmon commands used to interact with SLURM and check on job status. For more, check out [this page](https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart.html).

* `squeue -u <netid>` to check all jobs of a user.

* `scancel <jobid>` to cancel a job. `scancel  {30000..32000}` to cancel a range of jobs (job id between 30000 and 32000).

* `sinfo | grep genomicsguestA` to check status of nodes. `alloc` means all cores on a node are completely engaged; `mix` means some cores on a node are engaged; `idle` means all cores on a node are available to accept jobs.

* `seff <jobID>` to check how much '**eff**ort' a job took

* `sacct -X` to display all accounting data for all jobs for a user. `-X` options only shows stats relevant to the job allocation itself, leaving out different steps in the process. This is a fine way to check on the status of submitted jobs and to get the job id. 

## Merging FASTQ files from multiple lanes

If we do sequencing ourselves on a NextSeq or any Illumina machine that organizes flowcells into "Lanes", the data we receive is returned 'by lane', even though each sample is present in all lanes. In this case, it is a good idea to merge reads by lane.

The following bash script will do it, but it has been generalized so that you need to enter the proper information w/r/t directories. 

This script will change to the _parental_ directory containing the downloaded data, create a new directory "Raw_Data" where it will save the merged fastq.gz files, then change to the subdirectory that contains the downloaded (split by lane) data, and loop through the fastq files, merging them. 

!!! Note
     For this to work, you have to move each pair of reads (for paired-end data) out of the individual directory that Illumina provides it in, to a single common directory. It would be possible to write some code that would do this for you, but so far I've just done it manually. 

```
#!/bin/bash

cd <path/to/directory/above/your/downloaded/fastQ/data>
mkdir Raw_Data

parentdir=<path/to/directory/above/your/downloaded/fastQ/data>
rawdir=<directory name with the downloaded fastQ data>

cd $parentdir/$rawdir

echo
echo

ls -1 *R1*.gz | awk -F '_' '{print $1"_"$2}' | sort | uniq > ID

for i in `cat ./ID`
do
    echo "Merging"
    echo $i
    echo

    cat $i\_L001\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L002\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L003\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L004\_R1_001.fastq.gz > $parentdir/Raw_Data/$i\_R1_cat.fastq.gz

    cat $i\_L001\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L002\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L003\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L004\_R2_001.fastq.gz > $parentdir/Raw_Data/$i\_R2_cat.fastq.gz

done
```

Commit message:

updated dryguide.md with tips on scheduling resources

docs/dryguide.md, after:

# Blythe Dry Lab Guide

[TOC]

Many thanks to the Andersen Lab, whose own "Dry Guide" is the basis for this adaptation. 

The computing cluster available to researchers at Northwestern is called Quest. Please see the link below to go to the table of contents for Northwestern IT's support docs for Quest.

__[Quest Docs](http://www.it.northwestern.edu/research/user-services/quest/index.html)__

## Introduction/Overview

New users will likely have some confusion about how all of this works. This guide is meant to help you with that. As a high-level overview: we can use a remote computing cluster called Quest to run processor-intensive jobs without tying down our local computation resources. Quest is a collection of "Nodes" of many multithreaded processors, as well as disk storage space. You can think of Quest as a remote computer that you can interact with solely through the command line. The computational resources on Quest are parceled out into 'allocations'. The most important allocation for our purposes is __b1042__. This is the "Genomics" buy-in allocation. Anyone at NU can sign up for access to __b1042__, and once they have access, they can begin submitting jobs to this system. When you log in to Quest, however, you aren't 'within' __b1042__, instead, when you log in, you are dropped off in your home directory (in terms of the file-system), and are using (in terms of computational resources) what is referred to as a __login node__. While __b1042__ has many cores and much memory available for computational processes, __login nodes__ have relatively less computational power. Therefore, if we have processor-instensive jobs to perform, we don't want to use a __login node__, instead we want to use __b1042__. To do this, we have to ask Quest to do our jobs on __b1042__ through one of two methods: as an 'interactive session' or as a 'batch submission'. Below, I describe how to initiate both of these approaches. 

Storage is another matter: each user's home directory has a limited amount of *private* storage that will be indefinitely maintained (and backed up). This is on the order of 80 Gigabytes, which isn't much. There are two other storage options: within the *Scratch Space* within __b1042__ as well as within the lab's own dedicated project, __p31603__. *Scratch Space* is essentially a wild-west first-come-first-served disk space for *all* users of __b1042__ to *temoprarily* store files that they are using in a project. It is vast (~200 Terabytes), not backed up, and files over 30-days in age are deleted regularly. The Blythe Lab has a directory within __b1042__ created within this *Scratch Space* that lab members can use to temporarily store files if necessary. In addition, the Blythe Lab has a dedicated "project" within Quest (__p31603__)that affords us 500 Gigabytes of storage space. This is the location where we should focus on staging our computational tasks. 

In the following, I describe how to get access to Quest, how to use some of its unique features, and how to submit jobs. 

## New Users

To gain access to Quest: 

Register new user with your NetID [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form?EQBCT=9b3647a8cb2145929737ab4a0540cb46).
		
Apply to be added to the lab's partition/project/allocation (p31603) [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/797775d810274db5889b5199c4260328).
Allocation manager: Shelby Blythe, `shelby.blythe@northwestern.edu`
		
Apply to be added to partition b1042 [here](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/797775d810274db5889b5199c4260328).
Allocation manager: Janna Nugent, `janna.nugent@northwestern.edu`

Use the Quest Help email: `quest-help@northwestern.edu` if necessary to get help

## Using Terminal or Something Fancier

Mac users can access Quest using Terminal. If you haven't used Terminal, search for it (`command + Space`, then enter "Terminal"). It is possible, however, to configure text editors to access Quest directly. This way, you can use the text editor to directly modify scripts without having to rely on Command Line text editors (like `nano`). I particularly like [Visual Studio Code (VSCode)](https://code.visualstudio.com/). VSCode runs on both Mac and Windows machines.

You can then configure VSCode to connect to the ssh host (Quest) by following [these instructions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh).

## Using the Command Line and `bash`

In general, you will be using the command line and `bash` when you use Quest. There are many available resources to learn the basics (Google it). To get started, Northwestern has collected some tutorials [here](https://sites.northwestern.edu/researchcomputing/2020/03/20/online-learning-resources-command-line/).

## Signing into Quest

Once you have been granted access to the cluster and have sorted out how you will connect, you can login using:

```
ssh <netid>@quest.northwestern.edu
```

If you are using Terminal, to avoid typing in the password everytime, one can [set up a ssh key](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-2).

You can set an alias in your `~/.bash_profile` to make logging in quicker:

```
alias quest="ssh <netid>@quest.it.northwestern.edu"
```

The above line makes it so you simply type `quest` and the login process is initiated. 

If you are not familiar with what a bash profile is, [take a look at this](https://www.quora.com/What-is-bash_profile-and-what-is-its-use).

!!! Important
    When you login it is important to be conscientious of the fact that you are on a login node. You should not be running any sort of heavy duty operation on these nodes. Instead, any analysis you perform should be submitted as a job or run using an interactive job (see below).

## Login Nodes

There are four login nodes we use: quser21-24. When you login you will be assigned to a random login node. You can switch login nodes by typing ssh and the node desired (_e.g._ `ssh quser21`).

You can easily determine your current login node by reading the command prompt, which takes the form: `<netID>@quser21`, if --for instance-- you are on the quser21 login node.

## Home Directory

Logging in places you in your home directory. You can install software in your home directory for use when you run jobs, or for small files/analysis.

Your home directory has a quota of 80 Gb. [More information on quotas, storage, etc](http://www.it.northwestern.edu/research/user-services/quest/file-systems.html).  You can check your storage space using the following command (from within your home directory):

```
du -hs *
```

This command `du` will estimate the **d**isk **u**sage of the current directory. `-hs` returns the **s**ummary of **h**uman-readable (i.e., not hidden) files.

From anywhere, you can determine the disk usage of your home directory using 

```
homedu
```

More information is provided below to help install and use software.

!!! Note
    In general, we will not be saving files long-term anywhere on Quest! Most of your work will take place within the project directory __p31603__. All files should be stored on the lab's network accessible storage device/server. 

## Projects

Quest is broadly organized into projects (or partitions, or allocations). Projects have associated with them storage, nodes, and users.

To determine what "groups" you have access to, enter `groups` on the command line. You should see at the very least `b1042` and `p31603` in the returned text. 

The Blythe lab has access to one project, __p31603__. This is where we have 500 GB of total storage. This is where we will store any compiled software necessary for running our analyses, as well as stage computational tasks. 

__b1042__ - The 'Genomics' Project has 200 Tb of space and 100 nodes associated with it. This space is shared with other labs and is designed for temporary use only. The space is available at `/projects/b1042/BlytheLab/`. By default, files are deleted after 30 days. One can submit jobs to `--partition=genomicsguestA` to use this partition, with a max job duration of 48hr. 

!!! Note
    Anyone who uses Quest should build your own folder under `/projects/p31603` with your name. You should only write and revise files under your project folder. You can read/copy data from elsewhere in __p31603__ but don't write/save any data to locations outside of your project folder. You could also store things on `/projects/b1042/BlytheLab`, but storage anywhere on __b1042__ is for 30 days only, so do not store anything here that you hope to maintain access to over a long period. We have limited space on __p31603__. This is also not a long-term location for storage, but rather a site where you import raw data, and save the output of processing, before you download the data back to long-term storage. 

## Running interactive jobs on Quest

If you are running a few simple commands or want to experiment with files directly you can start an interactive session on Quest. The command below will give you access to a node where you can run your commands. 

```
srun -A b1042 --partition=genomicsguestA -N 1 -n 24 --mem=64G --time=12:00:00 --pty bash -i 
```

!!! Important
    Do not run commands for big data on `quser21-24`. These are login nodes and are not meant for running heavy-load workflows. Using `srun` allows you to access (interactively) the correct nodes for your work. Another option (below) is to schedule a batch job. 
   
## Using packages already installed on Quest

Quest has a collection of packages installed. You can run `module avail` to see what packages are currently available on Quest. You can use `module load bowtie2` or `module load bowtie2/2.4.1` to load packages with the default or a specific version (`module add` does the same thing). If you do `echo $PATH` before and after loading modules, you can see what module does is simply appending paths to the packages into your `$PATH` so the packages can be found in your environment.

`module purge` will remove all loaded packages and can be helpful to try when troubleshooting.

## Submitting jobs to Quest

If you are all set up to use the lab's resources on Quest, you should be able to run the following test script to confirm that everything is operating as expected. The lab's project allocation contains a directory (.../TestData) that we use to check that everything is configured properly. 

Jobs on Quest are managed by [SLURM](https://slurm.schedmd.com/). Scripts for SLURM submissions differ slightly from regular bash scripts in that they have an extensive header that passes commands to SLURM that helps it determine how many resources to allocate to the job. Please see the `/projects/p31603/Quest_Setup_Test_Script_PE.sh` for an example of a script that is set up to run via the batch scheduler. A set of brief instructions on how to run the test script is included on a later page in this guide.

## Deciding How Much Resources to Ask For

This is tricky to guess. In general, you want to ask for about 2x more resources than your job actually takes. On the job scheduler, you need to request an amount of cluster up-time, a number of cores/cpus, and an amount of memory per cpu.

__The trade-off__ is that the more resources you ask for, the longer it takes for the scheduler to start your job. On the other hand, if you don't ask for sufficient resources, the process will terminate if you run out of time, or perhaps throw an error if memory resources are exceeded. 

!!! Note
    All of our jobs are only performed on a single _node_. The line on the job scheduler for nodes should read: `#SBATCH --nodes=1`

Once you have an idea of how your jobs run, you can adjust the following as necessary. In a recent run, tasks like trimming a set of paired-end reads (~20M reads/mate pair/sample) took around 10 minutes per sample. Mapping with bowtie2 (plus samtools and picard) took an additional 30 minutes. Therefore, if you have 12 samples of this type, a trimming and mapping script would take at least 8 hours of clock time. Pad this. Ask for 10 hours of compute time, the appropriate number of cores (8?), and sufficient memory (8 GB).

```
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=8
#SBATCH --time=10:00:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=8G
```

As mentioned above, this could take some time to schedule, but it should be sufficient to complete the job. 

## Monitoring SLURM Jobs on Quest

Here are some commmon commands used to interact with SLURM and check on job status. For more, check out [this page](https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart.html).

* `squeue -u <netid>` to check all jobs of a user.

* `scancel <jobid>` to cancel a job. `scancel  {30000..32000}` to cancel a range of jobs (job id between 30000 and 32000).

* `sinfo | grep genomicsguestA` to check status of nodes. `alloc` means all cores on a node are completely engaged; `mix` means some cores on a node are engaged; `idle` means all cores on a node are available to accept jobs.

* `seff <jobID>` to check how much '**eff**ort' a job took

* `sacct -X` to display all accounting data for all jobs for a user. `-X` options only shows stats relevant to the job allocation itself, leaving out different steps in the process. This is a fine way to check on the status of submitted jobs and to get the job id. 

## Merging FASTQ files from multiple lanes

If we do sequencing ourselves on a NextSeq or any Illumina machine that organizes flowcells into "Lanes", the data we receive is returned 'by lane', even though each sample is present in all lanes. In this case, it is a good idea to merge reads by lane.

The following bash script will do it, but it has been generalized so that you need to enter the proper information w/r/t directories. 

This script will change to the _parental_ directory containing the downloaded data, create a new directory "Raw_Data" where it will save the merged fastq.gz files, then change to the subdirectory that contains the downloaded (split by lane) data, and loop through the fastq files, merging them. 

!!! Note
     For this to work, you have to move each pair of reads (for paired-end data) out of the individual directory that Illumina provides it in, to a single common directory. It would be possible to write some code that would do this for you, but so far I've just done it manually. 

```
#!/bin/bash

cd <path/to/directory/above/your/downloaded/fastQ/data>
mkdir Raw_Data

parentdir=<path/to/directory/above/your/downloaded/fastQ/data>
rawdir=<directory name with the downloaded fastQ data>

cd $parentdir/$rawdir

echo
echo

ls -1 *R1*.gz | awk -F '_' '{print $1"_"$2}' | sort | uniq > ID

for i in `cat ./ID`
do
    echo "Merging"
    echo $i
    echo

    cat $i\_L001\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L002\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L003\_R1_001.fastq.gz $i\_L004\_R1_001.fastq.gz > $parentdir/Raw_Data/$i\_R1_cat.fastq.gz

    cat $i\_L001\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L002\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L003\_R2_001.fastq.gz $i\_L004\_R2_001.fastq.gz > $parentdir/Raw_Data/$i\_R2_cat.fastq.gz

done
```
